# A template to maintain vocabularies in gitlab with the voc4cat-tool

This repository may be cloned/forked to create and maintain your own SKOS-vocabularies. It is maintained as part of the [NFDI4Cat](http://www.nfdi4cat.org) initiative.

It uses the [voc4cat-tool](https://gitlab.fokus.fraunhofer.de/nfdi4cat/ta1-ontologies/heterogen-synth) and CI-automation to reduce the workload for contributors and editors.


# Workflow improvements

To discuss about the workflow and the tool for maintaining SKOS vocabularies based on this template, feel free create an [voc4cat-tool issue](https://gitlab.fokus.fraunhofer.de/nfdi4cat/ta1-ontologies/voc4cat/-/issues).


# Contributing to vocabularies

To discuss about the SKOS vocabularies maintained with this template, create an [issue](https://gitlab.fokus.fraunhofer.de/nfdi4cat/ta1-ontologies/voc4cat/-/issues) in the vocbulary repository (but not in the template-repository).

To contribute concrete new vocabularies or change existing ones, you may either submit your contributions as Excel-file or (as an expert) as new/changed turtle file. The steps for submitting updates in turtle are not different from contributing source code to other gitlab repositories.

Here are the steps, for submitting updates in Excel.
  - Get the Excel-vocabulary file
    - For an existing vocabulary, download the last version of the vocabulary from ? (to-be-decided)
    - For a new vocabulary, use the template from the templates-folder.
 - Add your changes to the Excel file
 - Create a merge request with the updated Excel-file. 
   - The name of the Excel-file must match the vocabulary that you want to update (e.g. catvoc.xlsx to update a vocabulary named "catvoc"). 
   - New vocabularies will be named like the Excel-file (minus the .xlsx-extension).
 - Your merge request will be processed automatically by a CI/CD pipeline.
 - Review the artifacts/logs generated by the CI pipeline.
 - If all is good your contribution will be either
   - directly merged by the maintainers 
   - or a discussion will be started about what else is needed 
   - or why the proposed change may not fit.


# Authors and acknowledgment

* David Linke (ORCID: 0000-0002-5898-1820): 
  - Initial setup of repository and CI/CD pipelines

  
# License

All vocabularies in this repository are CC0 licenced, see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details. [Adapt this to your needs]

The template itself is CC0 licenced, see [LICENSE](LICENSE). Although there is no obligation, we nevertheless appreciate if our work is acknowledged in any derivative work.
